We're gonna talk about Electron today.
What does that mean?
We're gonna take the fact
that we're web developers and
ignore that reality for a moment.
And just realize that in the modern era,
being a JavaScript developer means
you can do whatever you want, right?
It means you could [LAUGH]
hack on some hardware,
it means that you can build
desktop applications, right?
That's one of the great things about being
a front end engineer in the modern era.
So today, we're gonna talk a lot about
building full on desktop applications.
And one of the things I think a lot
about is, at one point in my life,
you had to show a slide which is like,
and here's the one or
two applications that are really reels
that are built on top of Electron.
I looked at my doc the other day and
realized that almost
all of the applications that
I use on a daily basis,
many of them happen to be Electron
applications, arguably Chrome as well.
But these days between Visual Studio Code,
Obsidian,
which is a note-taking application,
the GitHub client, unsurprisingly,
is an Electron application.
Figma, Slack, by definition,
you probably use at least one
Electron app daily, right?
And so today,
what we're gonna do is we're gonna talk
a little bit about how to build those.
Right, and there are some
conceptual pieces to think about,
right, but once you kinda wrap
your head around the model, right,
the actual full range of
possibility is incredibly exciting.
And at the end of the day,
Electron is really just kind of
the marriage of two things, right?
A full Node.js runtime as well as
a full Chromium based runtime.
And so on one hand you've got chromium.
And the nice part too is Electron comes
bundled with both of these, right?
And so when you go and you package and
you build your Electron application,
you don't have to worry about
are they running node 16?
Are they running Node 20?
Whatever version build they're running,
cuz you would package your own version
of Node and you don't necessarily have
to worry about browser support and
capabilities, and something,
something Safari right?
Because you are also packaging
your own Chromium runtime.
And so as I said before, Electron is
basically kind of just bringing together
a version of Chromium, a version of Node,
and then creating a bunch of bridges
between those two processes to allow you
to kind of both have the full access of
a Node.js environment slash what we might
think of a lot of times as a server.
As well as, everything that comes in
the browser, most notably the DOM,
the runtime engine,
all the web APIs as well.
So from Chromium, you get full HTML5
support, GPU acceleration, Blink,
V8, which you also get on the Node side,
and all of the modern web APIs.
And like I said, since you know exactly
what version of Chromium you're using cuz
you chose it when you chose the version of
Electron, you can kind of rest confidently
on what features you can and
cannot rely on as well.
And then on the other side, you've got all
of Node.js wher, not only do you have full
file system access and all the things
you have normally from node.
You also can compile native module.
So if you look at a lot of databases,
the drivers are perhaps C/C++,
you can also compile those and
bundle those into your app as well.
So you can ship your app with a Rust
module as well if you need to optimize for
performance.
And so you don't have these limitations
on what goes on the server,
what goes on the client.
There's some amount of that to think
about, but mostly predominantly for
security reasons, because the part
that your users interact with,
you probably wanna have at least
a little bit of a wall between that and
the part that can write
to their file system.
But other than that, you actually
have both of these things together,
which kinda opens up a realm of
possibilities that are a lot
bigger than either one independently,
right?
It's like the whole is greater
than the sum of its parts.
I think that's definitely
true with Electron.
And like I said, at this point we
are far enough in to the Electron era,
if you will, to know that, can you build
desktop quality apps that feel at home?
I spend most of my life in
Visual Studio Code, right?
And unfortunately, as a manager,
I spent a lot of my life in Slack as well.
We don't talk about that part.
But a lot of my life is in VS Code,
which is an Electron app.
My note taking app, Obsidian,
Electron app, so on and so forth, right?
And once we kind of wrap our heads
around the process model and
the nuances of the OS integration,
then the actual ability for
you to build desktop applications for
your need.
Whether it's a direct business
use case or, honestly,
I wish I had this convenience app that
I could just drag an image in and
get it to do the right thing that I
use over and over and over again.
The ability to kinda build these
things and package them up and
use them is I think really great as well.
So we're gonna build
a few little apps today.
We've got just kind of
a mark down rendering app.
And I think this does a really great
job of demoing a lot of the kind
of interesting pieces of an Electron app,
which is it can read from the file system.
It can write to the file system, right?
It can export things.
It can show that file in either finder or
Windows Explorer,
depending on what operating
system you're using, right?
It can then also open that markdown file
in the default application that the OS
knows about, things that might be a lot
harder to do in the browser are kind of
just natural and
easy inside of an Electron app.
So I think it's a really
great way to kinda see.
We can trigger data file dialogs,
we can scope which kinda file and
things along those lines, Mark.
>> What if you wanted a desktop app
as well as the browser app with
the single code base.
Have you seen that before?
>> Yeah, I mean, you can theoretically,
and when we get to the build tool, things.
When we start building some of these
apps using the Electron Forge,
you'll see kind of that you
have a lot of the browser code,
you do separate from
the main process code.
You're not kinda jamming
them all in together.
There is a little dance between the two.
Would you have to do
some work to figure out,
making the actual API calls
versus maybe talking directly.
Yeah, but you could give yourself
the abstractions, but the kind of code,
especially when we look at Electron Forge.
You might use Vite, for instance, or Vite,
as they say, or Webpack or what have you,
to build all the client-side assets.
You do need to do a little bit
more of a mono repo dance, and
you need to build yourself
some of the abstractions, but
there's nothing stopping you because
it's just Chromium and Node, right?
It's just some affordances you
might give yourself in the code.
And the nice part is, back in the day,
also known as the last time we did
this workshop, you could do a lot of just
regular node calls in the browser context,
which theoretically would make it
very hard to ship it to the browser.
Turns out that was not the best
security posture in the world.
And so can you go around that and
circumvent and do that still?
You absolutely can.
Am I gonna show you how to do insecure
things that you shouldn't do?
I will allude to it, but
I will not be doing that, right?
And so insofar that we do try to separate
a lot of the UI piece from the Node piece,
but still have that kind of integration
point over this module in Electron
called the context bridge, we already
have that kind of separation of concerns.
But there's nothing stopping you from
having a version where you can export
a client side UI piece, and
then also having the full Electron piece.
A lot of it just becomes,
how you set up a mono repo?
And how do you make sure that you've
given yourself an abstraction
where you can swap in making the API
calls versus whatever, right?
But theoretically, you could also just
spin up a server, so on and so forth.
Or maybe it's an application that lives,
but then talks to a remote server as well.
Which is true probably if you think of
the GitHub application, Figma, so on and
so forth,
that they are by definition, right,
just progressively enhancing the web
experience with additional capabilities.
So absolutely.
Yep, so we've got a markdown application.
And then we also have,
depending on what we want,
we can always build
the classic to-do list.
And then the ability to build actual
menu bar and system tray applications,
depending on your operating system, right?
So system tray for Windows, menu bar for
MacOS, and kind of build applications
like places that you normally don't
find web views all the time, right?
i mean, you do because we live in a world
where there's Electron apps all over
the place.
But generally speaking, the ability to
kind of create all sorts of different
experiences above and beyond what you
might have in the browser as well.
So kind of the high level we're gonna
cover, obviously, like I said, and
I will say this probably two more
times before we really jump into it,
is the biggest part of understanding and
grokking how to build an Electron app is
this dance between the main process and
the render process.
We'll talk about the Electron
process model in a moment.
But in terms of the high level, what we
wanna kind of talk about today is, again,
triggering these native
file system dialogues for
both saving and opening files, and then
accessing the file system accordingly.
Some of the operating system
level integration that you might
leverage to make your app feel
a little bit more at home, right?
We will skirt around the really,
really OS specific stuff because you
might be on a Linux machine or
a Windows machine or a MacOS machine.
We'll do a few little nods
that make it feel correct, but
you do everything from have touchbar
integration on the 2016 to, whatever,
2019 Macbook pros, to the tiles in
Windows 10 and 11, so on and so forth.
Outside of just the very first foray,
as we showed just a high
level look at Electron, we're just
gonna use TypeScript out of the box.
One, because it's super easy.
Two, because that way we've solved
that question right then and there.
If you don't wanna use TypeScript,
you can just change any
of the file extensions to .js, but
you will see that it is shockingly
little TypeScript that I have to write
to get everything working, right?
And also as someone live coding,
having a type checker catch my
booboos before I squint at my
screen wondering why something's
not working is beneficial to me.
We will talk a little bit about,
in the first example,
we'll just do vanilla JavaScript, or
I guess vanilla TypeScript, right?
But in the second example, just to kinda
show how easy it is to integrate a front
end framework, we'll grab React
because it's the lingua franca.
And we'll kinda do the second one using
React just to show that integrating any of
these front end frameworks is super easy,
right?
The goal of our time together
is to at least make sure
that there's not a lot of
huge unanswered questions.
We'll talk about some of the other
features, like accessing clipboard,
triggering notifications,
registering a global shortcut so
you can activate your app from
anywhere with a keystroke.
Again, putting the menu
bar in the system tray and
then what it might look to use some native
modules if need be, as well, right?
So we kind of have all of those different
bullets that we'll hit along the way.
The only thing that we're really not
gonna focus on very deeply is the kinda
packaging signing out cuz
that's very OS specific.
In a lot of cases,
to just package the app,
Electron Forge makes that super simply,
just npm run package.
To get the Apple developer certs
designed to put in the app store
is $100 outlay that I'm not
gonna ask everyone to do.
But generally speaking, to build and
develop the apps is kind of where we're
gonna focus our time and energy today,
rather than getting to the very nuance
that is operating specific and
involves laying out possibly $100 or more.